Pipeline applications
============

Introduction
-----------
We provide scripts to automate individual step of the COSI data analysis.

These can be called from the command line and require, at minimum, only a .yaml configuration file listing the input parameters and the files (cosi dataset, response file, orientation file, background file) to process.

Here, we demonstrate the usage of the available applications, which are, at the moment:

cosi-bindata: to bin an unbinned dataset, matching a given response matrix. Optionally, it applies a time selection tmin-tmax to the unbinned data before binning. It outputs the .yaml file with the binning information, the binned dataset, and optionally the time-selected unbinned dataset.

cosi-threemlfit: to fit a source at l,b with a given threeml spectral model and optionally, in a time window tstart-tstop. It outputs the results of the fit (in a fits file), and a plot of the data and best-fit model. It prints in the terminal the best-fit parameters and the flux (with errors) in the 0.1-10 MeV band, computed from the best-fit model.

For all the applications, the option --h or --help prints an help file that describes the function, the inputs, the outputs and the command line options available:

cosi-threemlfit --help

A practical example
~~~~~~~~~~~~
We provide an example of usage of the command line applications in the file run_tutorial.sh.

It is also possible to run the applications from a python script: this is shown in the file run_tutorial.py.

This tutorial uses the data of GRB 081207680 from dc3 and the Galactic background component (for simplicity).

This particular GRB starts at t=1836496100.0 and ends at t=1836496188.1.

The script get_tutorial_data.py downloads all the necessary files and prepare the dataset for the analysis (i.e. combine source and background unbinned data).

The provided tutorial should be run entirely and in sequence, as later steps relies on files generated by earlier steps.

This example uses the app cosi-bindata to bin and cut in time around the time window of the grb the background file.

Hence, it bins and cut in time the grb+bk data file thus preparing the dataset for fitting.

Finally, it fits the binned grb+bk data in the whole time window, in the first ten seconds and in the last twenty seconds.


The .yaml parameter file
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The files prep_bk_fit_grbdc3.yaml and prep_fit_grbdc3.yaml are example of configuration files needed to run the applications.

Note the following:

The parameters for each applications are subgrouped into sections in the file. The default config_group name are bindata (for cosi-bindata) and threemlfit (for cosi-threemlfit).

These names can be customized, as the app can be run using the --config_group option (e.g., cosi_threemlfit --config_file MY_CONFIG_FILE --config_grup MY_CONFIG_GROUP).

Some parameters have suboptions, following the structure of the TBD Interface of cosipy.

Optional parameters can be set to null.

In the case of cosi-threemlfit, the input model and starting parameters have to be input from the .yaml file.

Threeml has a built-in option to export a particular model to the .yaml format. This is shown in the file export_threemlmodel.py for the model of this tutorial.


How to call the applications from the command line
~~~~~~~~~~~~

All these options are demonstrated in the tutorial.

A .yaml parameters file is the minimum requirement to call an application e.g.:

cosi-bindata --config_file MY_CONFIG_FILE

will run cosi-bindata with the parameters set in MY_CONFIG_FILE.

It is possible to add options directly in the command line e.g. :

cosi-bindata --config_file MY_CONFIG_FILE --odir MY_OUTPUT_DIRECTORY

is the same as before, but the outputs will be saved in the given ouput directory.

It is also possible to override parameters of the .yaml file, either naming them directly in the command string or using the override option for any parameters.

For instance:

cosi-bindata --config_file MY_CONFIG_FILE --tmin TMIN --tmax TMAX

will run cosi-bindata and set the tmin and tmax parameters to new values.

cosi-threemlfit --config_file MY_CONFIG_FILE --override cuts:kwargs:tstart=TSTART cuts:kwargs:tstop=TSTOP.

will run cosi-threemlfit and set the tstart and tstop parameters to new values.



How to call the applications from a python script
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This option is demonstrated in the tutorial.

It could be convenient sometimes to run applications from a python script, rather than from the terminal.

This is possible by providing the command line options as a list of string (see run_tutorial.py)
